---
layout: post
title:  "MySQL via Shell and Python in Google Colab"
date:   2025-05-12 00:00:00 +0000
categories: SQL
---

description...

# Outline
- ...
- ...


# Intro

The ever-ubiquitous SQL language has been the standard for database-querying since the 70's, though numerous versions exist. In this article we will be looking at MySQL, for which the community version is free. Similar alternatives include SQL Server Express, PostgreSQL, and MariaDB. "NoSQL" languages, such as those relying on JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), have risen in popularity within the past couple of decades, and will be addressed in a future article.

Similarly, Python has become one of the most widely adopted programming languages, for tasks that don't require low-level systems such as C++. IPython notebooks (.ipynb) are extremely popular because of:
- Their shareability, readability, and transparency
- Their ability to document, provide, and preserve output at various stages of a workflow, and
- Their capability for real-time feedback while coding, which is particularly useful for debugging

IPython notebooks allow for neat features such as rendering a webpage from the workbook contents, integration with shell commands to the virtual environment, and the ability to create and use cell "magic commands", one use of which is to integrate other languages like SQL. There are also functions within various modules which will accept an SQL query in text, but don't provide the same kind of keyword-formatting you see in an SQL editor.

We'll be working in a Google Colab Python notebook, starting with shell commands, and then progressing to use <code>mysql-server</code>, <code>mysql-connector-python</code>, and <code>pymysql</code>. You should be able to recreate the functionality in your shell, .py script, etc., though various installations and configurations are required.

Of course, hosting your business's database on a Google Colab notebook would be highly problematic, as the data would only be retained for the duration of the session (or require being written to file). But it will do nicely for the sake of code comprehension.

I must also mention that it is not a good practice to include passwords in your code, as I have done for the sake of transparency. One alternative is to store those commands in a secure .sql file, and have the command reference that.

Google Colab runs on a Linux environment, so the shell commands use Bash</a>. Don't leave if you are unfamiliar with Bash or SQL - that just means you are part of the target audience - but do use the following links for context, if necessary:

- <a href="https://www.w3schools.com/bash/index.php">https://www.w3schools.com/bash/index.php</a>
- <a href="https://www.w3schools.com/sql/">https://www.w3schools.com/sql/</a>



# Install and Import Libraries

We'll start by installing <code>mysql-server</code>. <code>!apt-get update</code> simply refreshes the list of available packages. <code>-y</code> in the install command will automatically answer all prompts with yes during installation, and <code>/dev&#8203;/null 2>&1</code> is an option to suppress cell output (as its fairly lengthy).

```bash
!apt-get update > /dev/null 2>&1
!apt-get install -y mysql-server > /dev/null 2>&1
```

The below moves the user’s home directory with where MySQL’s data files are stored

```bash
!usermod -d /var/lib/mysql mysql
```

Next, we start the SQL service.

```bash
!service mysql start
```

<p></p>

```bash
# * Starting MySQL database server mysqld
#   ...done.
```

We can view the details of the service by entering the following.

```bash
# test for MySQL service
!service mysql status
```

<p></p>

```bash
#  * /usr/bin/mysqladmin  Ver 8.0.42-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 for Linux on x86_64 ((Ubuntu))
# Copyright (c) 2000, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates.

# Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle Corporation and/or its
# affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of their respective
# owners.

# Server version    8.0.42-0ubuntu0.22.04.1
# Protocol version  10
# Connection    Localhost via UNIX socket
# UNIX socket   /var/run/mysqld/mysqld.sock
# Uptime:     18 min 25 sec

# Threads: 2  Questions: 1048  Slow queries: 0  Opens: 454  Flush tables: 3  Open tables: 356  Queries per second avg: 0.948
```

Creating a <code>.my.cnf</code> file prevents us from having to specify our username and password each time we enter shell commands. <code>-f</code> stands for "force", meaning do not prompt for confirmation, and ignore nonexistent file, and <code>-e</code> stands for "execute".

```bash
# Create .my.cnf for password-based authentication
!rm -f ~/.my.cnf /root/.my.cnf                                     # clear if existing
!echo -e "[client]\nuser=root\npassword=pw" > ~/.my.cnf            # print text to CLI
!chmod 600 ~/.my.cnf                                               # grants read/write permissions to file owner
```















